# Integration of students

## Mentor programme 

In 2024, **242 mentors** were active in the mentor programme, **200** of
whom participated in the central mentor training. To improve
preparation, the training was organised in **three streams**, one of
which was in **English**, thus involving international students in the
mentoring programme. This marks an important step towards the
internationalisation of the programme and reaching out to a wider group
of students.

## Camps for first-year student(s)

**First-year camps** in 2024 were organised in **15 university units**
and a total of **834 participants**. These camps were a significant step
towards smoother integration of new students and building community from
the first days of studies.

**Two of these camps were held in English**, thus facilitating the
integration of international student(s) into the university community.

## VU SR Integration Festival \"Ad Astra\"

The fifth VU SA Integration Festival \"Ad Astra\" took place in 2024 and
offered a wide range of activities for students:

- 5 discussions on higher education topics,
- a contact fair with VU and VU SR organisations,
- VU and VU SR Organisations Workshop,
- a concert,
- and many opportunities for informal networking.

The event attracted around 3000 participants and was one of the
highlights of student engagement at the beginning of the academic year.

## III cycle integration

Together with the VU Doctoral and Postdoctoral Unit, a central
integration day for PhD students was organised, which this year took
place at the VU Scholarly Communication and Information Centre. It was a
discussion with PhD students and their supervisors about the challenges
and experiences of PhD studies. Afterwards, participants were able to
ask questions and talk freely in a world cafe principle. The integration
of third cycle students needs to be given even more attention, and a PhD
student mentoring initiative will be launched next year to help third
cycle students overcome academic, administrative and social challenges.


## Attrition prevention plan

VU SR contributed to the development of a **study success map**, run by
the VU Student services and careers office, aimed at early goal setting
and reducing student attrition. Although the implementation of the map
in the study process has been postponed to **2025/2026**, preparatory
work has already started.

Learning clusters have also been organised in cooperation with the
Student Services and Careers Unit (SSCU). **43 student/teacher
participants** and **70 student participants** registered.

**5 learning groups** were held (at the Life Sciences Centre - Organic
Chemistry, at the Faculty of Philosophy - Cognitive Psychology, at the
Å iauliai Academy - Programming languages and Object-oriented
programming, at the Faculty of Medicine - Human Physiology, at the
Institute of International Relations and Political Science -
Contemporary Political Theory)

This initiative focuses on enhancing the academic success of the
student(s) and fostering a culture of mutual support.
