# Process renewal

## Integration process

From 2024 to 2025, significant changes to the integration process have
been implemented to ensure better preparation and smoother integration
of new student(s) into the university community.

**Advanced processes:**

The selection of curators started earlier than in previous years, which
allowed the establishment of a team building phase. This phase is
designed to strengthen peer-to-peer collaboration and preparation before
the start of active mentoring. The central training of curators has also
been brought forward, which provides better opportunities to train
curators in the units. The membership test is still compulsory, but from
now on, curator(s) will have to pass it before they start their active
work.

**Integration of international students:**

A plan for integrating international students has been introduced to
involve this group of students in a more targeted and systematic way.
During this plan, it was noted that the curators who act as mentors
require additional competencies. A decision was made to separate the two
positions, making the curator and the mentor different positions with
different training needs.

**Mentoring for Doctoral students:**

The process of mentoring doctoral students has also been started. This
is a new step to ensure that PhD students have access to help, guidance
and community support from the start of their studies.

## Planning process

To make the planning process of VU SR smoother and after recognising
that not all members of the Organisation have the same knowledge of the
process within VU SR, a decision was made to review the planning process
again and to renew certain parts of the process to achieve a more
efficient and clearer implementation of the planning process and the set
objectives. Throughout updating the planning process, interviews were
conducted with the VU SR alumni, the VU SR U Chairpersons, the
Institutional Strengthening Fund and the VU SR Central Office. A working
session was also implemented in December, during which the main
solutions were identified to make the planning and implementation of VU
SR activities smoother.

The whole planning process of VU SR consists of four parts: preparation
for planning activities, implementation of planning activities,
implementation of the created plan and monitoring process. During the
update, all the latter parts of the process were reviewed from the
beginning and updated according to the needs expressed by the members.
The main changes were:

- Each year, the VU SR U teams had to clarify the issues in their unit
only after the change of the term of office, and this was done by the
new team, which in many cases could lack context. To ensure the quality
and timeliness of the problem identification process, it was decided
that the VU SR U teams should identify their problems and describe the
existing ones in more detail during March.
- The VU SR summer and VU SR U autumn training will have to include
activities focused on the relevance of VU SR planning or will have to be
related to the exploration and presentation of VU SR U problem areas.
- For each VU SR P to plan correctly and to be able to see the overall
plan of its annual activities, the following documents will be mandatory
for each team to fill in during the VU SR U planning sessions: the goal
implementation plan, the activity plan for the academic year, the grid
of activities for the academic year.
- Updated VU SR Goal Implementation Plan template.
- The VU SR U teams\' expectations for the moderators, the assignment of
moderators and the registration for the VU SR U planning are scheduled
to occur earlier than usual.
- A VU SR Planning Guide has been created, which provides a precise and
clear description of the most common types of planning in VU SR: VU SR
and VU SR U planning, annual activity planning, VU SR PCP planning and
area planning. The latter types of planning have been described based on
the current processes of the VU SR and with clear guidance on how each
of these processes is carried out and how to prepare for it.

## Kompetencijų žemėlapis / Map of competences

Participation in training to provide and improve competencies necessary
for the member\'s activity is a duty of Vilnius University Student
Representative body members as stated in the Statutes of the
Organisation, and consistency of competencies improvement is a strategic
project provided for in the VU SR 2022-2025 Strategic Action Plan. To
fulfil this duty as provided in the Statutes and as a priority in the
Strategic Plan, a competency map for VU SR members has been developed
for the period 2024-2025 - a concept to ensure:

- A strategic approach to the improvement of the competencies of VU SR
  members;

- The concept of the VU SR Membership Pathway defines that all members
  have equal opportunities to challenge themselves in the various
  activities of the Organisation and their implementation by learning
  about themselves, discovering new interests, striving for development
  and lifelong learning;

- The personal growth of each member is enabled by regular
  (self-)reflection and timely mutual feedback.

At the same time, it will be aimed that these principles become the
basis for the transformation of the internal culture of VU SR, ensuring
the expertise of the Organisation and the possibility for students who
join VU SR units, programmes, clubs, projects, other initiatives,
structures, work or self-expression groups to realise their
self-fulfilment and development.

## SIC atsiradimas / Emergence of SIC

The first year has been a busy and successful one. On 21 November, the
SIC organised a student(s) science fair featuring presentations by the
Student Naturalists\' Scientific Society (SGMD), the Student Scientific
Society (SSS) of the Institute of International Relations and Political
Science (IIRPS), (Un)discovered Asia, the Student Scientific Society
(SSS) of the Faculty of Communication, The COINS, the Student Scientific
Society (SSS) of the Faculty of History and the psychology student
society VUpsi. At the event, participants got to know the science-themed
self-expression initiatives at Vilnius University, ask questions and
learn more about their activities.

![SIC](/img/other/sic.jpg)

The Science Fair marked the start of the Student Science Initiative
Network, with 2 meetings of the SSS leaders after the fair to discuss
the importance of mutual collaboration and interdisciplinarity and to
develop new project ideas.

The SIC also focused on strengthening the university community in Kaunas
and Šiauliai. On the 11th of February, the SIC team organised an
initiative day at the VU Šiauliai Academy and on the 25th of March at
the VU Kaunas Faculty. Student initiatives of VU SR were presented to
the students studying at these VU units. The participants had the
opportunity not only to ask questions to the representatives of the
already existing student initiatives but also to learn from the VU SR
Student Initiative Centre members how they could establish an initiative
in their own community.

![SIC pristatymas](/img/other/sic-1.jpg)

On the 21st of February, the SIC organised Hack\'VU 25 - a hackathon of
student initiatives. During the Hackathon, the participants and the
activity moderator, Klaudijus Melys, worked on the ideas of their
initiatives and tried to solve practical issues. Afterwards, they had
the opportunity to seek help from mentors, who shared their experience
and knowledge and helped them develop plans to implement their ideas.
The event focused on creating a basketball club, a living Latin club, an
astronomy club, and initiatives to integrate international students from
different university units. The main prize of the Hackathon - €500
funding for implementing the initiative\'s activities - was won by the
VU Astronomy Club from the Faculty of Physics.

![SIC pristatymas](/img/other/sic-2.jpg)

In total, the SIC has helped to establish five new communities during
the term: the Crochet Club, the Writers\' Club, the Astronomers\' Club,
the Aurora Basket Basketball Club, and the Otium Palæmonis Living Latin
Club, as well as organising the activities of the VU Photo Club. These
new initiatives brought together many active students from different
faculties. To ensure the continuity of these student initiatives and to
create favourable conditions for the future creation of new ones, the
SIC prepared a description of the funding of VU SR student initiatives,
which the VU SR Parliament approved.

The SIC ends its first year of operation with a strong commitment to
pass on the experience gained to the new team and to ensure that the VU
SR Student Initiatives community continues to grow.

## Brandbook

As the current context and expectations of brand-images have changed,
the expectations for our brand-identity has been likewise changing for
some time. Meanwhile, the brand-book of our Organisation has remained
unchanged for 10 years and the logo for 30 years. We committed ourselves
to updating the visual identity of the Organisation, taking into account
modern trends and responding to the need to reflect the image of a
trustworthy NGO partner as well as an attractive university student
community, while at the same time tackling the many communicational
challenges that we have had in practice. During the 2024--2025 term, a
lengthy process of updating the organisation\'s visual identity was
undertaken.

### Dialogue and feedback

The year started with extensive context gathering. Through individual
and joint meetings with Coordinators, Members, Alumni, external graphic
design students and other relevant persons, feedback was gathered on
every aspect of the Organisation\'s image and visual identity. The
feedback fundamentally changed the vision of the brandbook more than
once. Taking everything into account, the draft visual identity was
formally presented and discussed in the period of December-April with
the Central Office, Council, Communication coordinators, in individual
meetings with VU SA units and alumni. After having had all the above
mentioned discussions and appropriate adjustments, the brandbook and
visual identity have been changed drastically and are being adopted with
almost unanimous agreement within the organisation.

### Logo and coat of arms

Following the decision to modernise the logo but keep its format as a
coat of arms emblem in the logo, we consulted alumni and representatives
of the VU Faculty of History, who recommended us to create a new but
associative and meaningful design for the coat of arms for the
Representation, based on heraldic traditions and norms. After
considerations within the organisation of what symbols are meaningful to
us -- the suggestions were unanimous. The updated VU SA logo and the
coat of arms embedded in it depicts 3 symbols, from top to bottom:
stars, a student cap and a student\'s hand with a book.
