# Projects

## State Studies Foundation funded project "Internationality -- from ideas to real examples"

In 2024, Vilnius University Students' Representation central office
implemented the project "Internationality -- from ideas to real
examples", which aimed to strengthen the integration of international
students into the higher education system, social and cultural life, as
well as the labour market in Lithuania. The project was implemented from
2024 March 1st to 2024 December 1st and gathered more than 500 students
from different study cycles and fields.

During the project a conference on the importance of internationality in
higher education was held. A podcast on the same topic was created and
then broadcasted. A publicity campaign on the experiences of
international students was carried out alongside a research on their
integration and employability. The SPEAK language learning platform was
also optimised. An information package on employment rights and job
search in Lithuania was developed. Vilnius University Career Days
website was updated with useful information for international students.

The project helped raise the profile of internationality, fostered
cooperation among the academic community, contributed to the development
of better integration tools and paved the way for further changes to
improve the experience of international students in Lithuania.

## Vilnius city municipality-funded project "Celebrating Students' Day at Vilnius University"

The project focused on strengthening the community of Vilnius University
through targeted educational and cultural activities to foster
interactions and interconnection between students, academic staff and
the administration. The project aimed not only to create platforms for
communication, but also to actualise student life through contemporary
contexts, involving participants in content creation and reflection
processes.

The main activities were the following: a thematic exhibition of
photographies and a trivia game. These were chosen as tools to achieve
both the social and cognitive objectives of the project. The photographs
presented in the exhibition, which reflected the student experience in
the halls of residence and the initiatives related to it, formed the
basis for a discussion on the culture of everyday life and its place in
the academic environment. The trivia was a form of informally testing
knowledge and community engagement. It involved different groups from
all over the university. By looking at the results, some of the planned
quantitative indicators were partially achieved, for example, although
there were less people in attendance for the exhibition, the events
still were well attended and the social media reach was in line with
projections. It should also be noted, that students were involved in the
organisation of the exhibition. It strengthened their practical skills
and cooperation competences.

## Newly submitted projects 

Two projects were also submitted and received during the reporting
period.

The first project is \"Higher education for all - without borders\". It
aims to strengthen the social dimension of higher education in
Lithuania, with a particular focus on the inclusion of underrepresented
groups. Responding to persistent barriers despite agreed national
priorities, the project foresees the following key actions:

1.  **Analysis and recommendations:**

A study will be carried out on the second accession queue and the
effectiveness of social dimension measures. Based on the results,
recommendations will be made and an open discussion will be held with
stakeholders.

2.  **Building a network of ambassadors:**

It is planned to gather a team of 35 student ambassadors who will visit
regional schools, conduct educational sessions and encourage students to
choose higher education.

3.  **Promoting student engagement:**

An information website, a communication campaign and the development of
podcasts on accessibility to higher education, with a particular focus
on accessibility for students with disabilities.

The second project is \"**Working Outside the Classroom - the Key to
Study Success?**\". It will aim to strengthen the employability of
students and promote academic potential by working more closely with
social partners and higher education institutions.

The project focuses on:

1.  **Analysis and research on student employment:**

A quantitative study (interviewing at least 1500 students) will be
carried out to analyse their work experience, the quality of their
internships and their skill gaps. There will also be qualitative
workshops in three cities on the challenges of combining studies and
work.

2.  **Improving employability:**

Several actions will be made: contact fairs with employers, seminar
sessions on the labour market, practical skills workshops (CV writing,
interviewing, time management) and regular newsletters on job
opportunities.

3.  **Promotion of academic careers:**

An information campaign on academia and the research pathway, updates on
academic activities, recruitment of local and international mentors and
their meetings with students.
