# Cooperation with other institutions

## VU Health and Sports Centre

This year, in cooperation with the VU Health and Sports Centre, the
activities organised by the HSC were made more accessible to students.
The VU SR Social Affairs coordinator discussed publicising the VU
Healthy University concept and making it accessible to Vilnius
University students.

## Community Well-being Division

Discussions on meeting the needs of students with disabilities:
upgrading and accessibility of infrastructure, updating the description
of the procedure for the personalisation of studies at Vilnius
University according to individual needs arising from disability. A
survey was developed and made publicly available to find out how the
needs of students with disabilities are met.

Discussions were held on increasing the number of free psychological
counselling sessions, increasing the number of community psychologists
in Kaunas and Šiauliai, updating the registration system for
psychological counselling sessions, setting up prayer/peace and
children\'s rooms, and publicising them. The VU SR Social Affairs
coordinator discussed publicising the VU Healthy University concept and
making it accessible to Vilnius University students.

Participated in the conference \'Activity and Attention Deficit Disorder
and Academic Success: Teaching, Learning, Career\', organised by the VU
Community Welfare Unit: participated in the panel discussion and
presented a paper on \'Studying with an Activity and Attention Deficit
Disorder: a student perspective\'.

## Youth organisations 

This year, in cooperation with other youth organisations operating in
Lithuania: Lithuanian youth council (LiJOT), the Lithuanian School
Students\' Union (LMS), the Lithuanian Youth Union of the World (LYUW)
and the Lithuanian Students Union (LSS) signed a joint letter on
proposals to extend the length of the permanent compulsory initial
military service, in which we proposed to postpone the discussion on the
extension of the service until the infrastructural and organisational
challenges are resolved, ensuring the proper implementation of the new
draft system and the readiness of the younger generation for the new
changes.

In addition, VU SR representatives participated in Vilnius Youth
Organisations Council (VJOSAS) Leaders\' Clubs and Assemblies,
maintaining close communication and cooperation on issues of importance
and relevance to young people. During the last VJOSAS Assembly, Daniel
Šematovič, a representative of VU SA, was elected to the Vilnius Youth
Affairs Council.
