# Papers

## Proposals for implementing higher education policy in Lithuania (2024-06-05) 

The Student Representation of Vilnius University, when submitting
proposals to political parties on the implementation of higher education
policy, suggested: expanding the social dimension in higher education,
individualising support for students with disabilities, improving the
integration processes of international students, strengthening the
quality of doctoral studies, reducing excessive requirements for
doctoral students. It was also proposed to establish a system of payment
for internships, to promote the involvement of students at all levels in
research activities and to ensure a sustainable infrastructure that
meets the needs of students. The proposals aimed at contributing to a
higher education system that is open, inclusive and responsive to the
needs of all students. After the letter was sent, we met with
representatives of several different political parties to discuss the
issues, and the most important work needed done. We also subsequently
analysed the education parts of the electoral programmes of all the
political parties and assessed which political parties had taken on
board the proposals sent to them.

## Regarding the Draft Amendments to Articles 62 and 77 of the Law on Science and Studies No. XI-242 (Draft No. XIVP-3802, 12 June 2024)

Vilnius University Students\' Representation (VU SR), in response to the
proposed amendments to the Law on Science and Studies, submitted its
comments and suggestions regarding the planned changes to Articles 62
and 77.

In its statement, VU SR expressed support for the proposal to allow
students to take academic leave due to compulsory initial military
service. However, it voiced opposition to the proposal that would equate
compulsory military service with practical experience when applying to
higher education institutions via the second admission queue. VU SR
stressed that such a measure would reduce access to higher education for
more vulnerable groups and would be inconsistent with the goals of
strengthening the social dimension.

Following the submission of the statement, the VU SR President
reiterated this position at a meeting of the Committee on Education and
Science of the Seimas of the Republic of Lithuania and, in cooperation
with a Member of Parliament, initiated an amendment to the law. This
amendment aimed to exclude compulsory initial military service and
professional military service from being considered in the second
admission queue. However, the Committee vote fell short of the necessary
majority, and the proposal was only partially taken into account.

## Regarding the Draft Law Amending Article 59 of the Law on Science and Studies No. IX-242 (Draft No. XIVP-3793, 2 October 2024)

In response to the draft resolution prepared by the Ministry of
Education, Science and Sport of the Republic of Lithuania, Vilnius
University Students\' Representation (VU SR) submitted proposals
concerning the financing of the higher education admission process.

In its statement, VU SR highlighted that prospective students often
incur additional expenses due to administrative and other
admission-related procedures. It was proposed that the state ensure
additional funding to cover these services, so that applicants would not
face extra charges, regardless of the study cycle or type of funding
(state-funded or self-funded). In the absence of such funding, VU SR
proposed that higher education institutions be obliged to waive fees for
applicants from socially vulnerable groups.

Following the submission of these proposals, various discussions were
held with relevant stakeholders. However, due to the changing
composition of the Seimas and the Ministry\'s leadership, the matter was
postponed to the next parliamentary term.

## Regarding the XIX Government\'s Priorities in the Field of Higher Education (28 November 2024)

In response to the formation of the Government's programme priorities,
the Vilnius University Students\' Representation (VU SR) submitted
proposals concerning the development of key areas in higher education.
The submitted letter highlighted the importance of strengthening the
social dimension, fostering internationalisation, improving conditions
for doctoral students, and expanding student engagement in scientific
activities.

VU SR proposed increasing social scholarships, improving admission
opportunities for students from socially vulnerable groups, developing
interdisciplinary study programmes, creating mechanisms for remuneration
of internships, and ensuring rent compensation for students. The
necessity of including international students in the national healthcare
system and creating more favourable conditions for doctoral candidates'
financial stability was also stressed.

Following the submission, the Government of the Republic of Lithuania
approved its programme, which reflects part of the proposals raised by
VU SR.

## Proposals Regarding the Conditions for the Funding of Student Summer Internships (9 December 2024)

In response to the Lithuanian Research Council\'s (LRC) approved
document *"Description of the Conditions for the Funding of Student
Summer Internships"*, the Vilnius University Students\' Representation
(VU SR) submitted proposals aimed at ensuring greater transparency in
the selection process and equal opportunities for students.

In the letter, VU SR proposed clearly defining expert evaluation
criteria, establishing expert committees for student selection,
publishing decision outcomes for student access, and granting students
the right to appeal the selection results. These proposals aimed to
enhance student involvement in research activities and improve the
overall quality of the selection process.

The proposals were also discussed with LRC Chair Dr Gintaras Valinƒçius.
Initially, the document was amended to include clearly defined
evaluation criteria, and later, several additional suggestions were
partially adopted.

## On Housing Rent Support for Students in Vilnius City Municipality (13 December 2024)

The Vilnius University Students' Representation (VU SR), in its address
to the Vilnius City Municipality Youth Affairs Council, drew attention
to legal and regulatory shortcomings that hinder students' access to
housing rent compensation. In the submitted letter, VU SR proposed
jointly initiating a review of excessive requirements tied to the
current support measure - such as the age limit and the mandatory
certificate proving the unavailability of a university dormitory.

Additionally, the letter suggested initiating supplementary support
schemes targeted at students residing in Vilnius. Following the
submission, VU SR participated in a meeting of the Vilnius City Youth
Affairs Council, during which the need for such a measure was discussed.
It was proposed to conduct a broader analysis of students' financial
literacy. VU SR continues its dialogue with the Youth Affairs
Coordinator at Vilnius City Municipality to pursue the implementation of
further proposals.

## Regarding Proposals to Extend the Duration of Mandatory Initial Military Service (9 January 2025)

The Vilnius University Students' Representation (VU SR), together with
other youth organisations, responded to emerging public proposals to
extend the duration of mandatory initial military service. In its
statement, VU SR emphasised the need to first ensure the effective
implementation of universal male conscription under the current version
of the Law on Military Conscription. The letter also highlighted
potential challenges related to infrastructure and public awareness that
could hinder the successful implementation of such a proposal.

VU SR advocated for strategic and comprehensive decision-making and
called for stronger involvement of youth organisations in shaping
policy. Following the letter's submission, VU SR held a meeting with the
Vice-Minister of National Defence of the Republic of Lithuania and
engaged in discussions with representatives of the Lithuanian Armed
Forces on increasing the appeal of military service among young people
and students.

## Regarding the Provisions of the 19th Government Programme in the Field of Higher Education and Their Implementation (20 January 2025)

Vilnius University Students' Representation (VU SR), after reviewing the
approved 19th Government Programme, submitted proposals concerning the
implementation of higher education policy measures. The letter
highlighted the importance of strengthening the social dimension,
promoting the integration of international students, improving
conditions for doctoral candidates, and fostering students' involvement
in research activities.

Key proposals included: establishing clear instruments for attracting
international talent, reforming the system of paid internships, revising
the conditions for student housing rental compensation, and enhancing
career opportunities for early-stage researchers. The letter also urged
the Government to ensure a consistent increase in social support
measures and scholarships, and emphasised the importance of access to
sexual and reproductive health services as well as the regulation of
residency study placements.

Following the letter and the publication of parts of the Government's
implementation plan, VU SR participated in public consultations
organised by the Ministry of Education, Science and Sport and the
Ministry of Health. During these consultations, the VU SR President
stressed the need to advance the timelines of several measures and
proposed adjustments to their wording and scope.

## Regarding the Student Summer Internship Funding Competition Administered by the Research Council of Lithuania (4 February 2025)

The Vilnius University Students' Representation (VU SR), responding to a
request from the Seimas Anti-Corruption Commission, submitted its
insights regarding the student summer internship funding competition
administered by the Research Council of Lithuania. The letter emphasised
the need to ensure transparency in the selection process by establishing
expert evaluation panels, including external experts and student
representatives, and guaranteeing the right for students to appeal
selection outcomes.

It was stressed that the current practice where decisions are made by a
single individual poses a risk of subjectivity and does not align with
the principles of transparency and equal opportunity. Following the
submission, the VU SR President participated in a session of the Seimas
Anti-Corruption Commission, where these concerns were articulated. Prior
to the session, the Research Council of Lithuania initiated amendments
to the procedure, allowing students to appeal the competition results.

## Submission Regarding the Coordination of Draft Legal Acts (27 February 2025)

The Vilnius University Students' Representation (VU SR), having reviewed
the draft legal acts submitted by the Government of the Republic of
Lithuania and the Ministry of Education, Science and Sport concerning
the allocation of state-funded study places for 2025, submitted
proposals and comments.

In the letter, VU SR proposed a 10% increase in the number of
state-funded study places allocated to the fields of Mathematics and
Physical Sciences. This recommendation aimed to address the shortage of
chemistry, physics, and mathematics teachers and to strengthen STEAM
education. Additionally, VU SR expressed disapproval of the existing
principles governing the formation of the second admission queue,
arguing that they are incompatible with the objectives of enhancing the
social dimension in higher education.

## Submission Regarding the Coordination of the Draft Law Amending Article 59 of the Republic of Lithuania Law on Science and Studies No. IX-242 (Draft No. XIVP-3793) (8 April 2025)

The Vilnius University Students' Representation (VU SR), in response to
the draft law proposed by the Government of the Republic of Lithuania
and the Ministry of Education, Science and Sport, submitted proposals
aimed at ensuring access to higher education.

In the letter, VU SR expressed concern about the potential risk of
increasing study-related costs and proposed to legally establish the
obligation of higher education institutions not to require additional
fees for the administration of admission documents from applicants to
all levels of study. The importance of eliminating additional financial
burdens especially for groups that are underrepresented in higher
education was also emphasised.

Internal discussions on this issue are still ongoing, and the draft law
is expected to be reviewed by the Seimas Committee on Education and
Science.
