# International Cooperation

## Visit to Warsaw

On 7th-9th February, the VU SR Central Office team visited Warsaw, where
they met with the Students\' Parliament of the University of Warsaw
(Samorząd Studentów Uniwersytetu Warszawskiego) and the Student Union of
the Republic of Poland (Parlament Studentów Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej).

The visit included a tour of the Warsaw University Palace. With members
of both the Students\' Union of the University of Warsaw (SSUW) and the
Student Union of the Republic of Poland, discussions were held on the
integration of international students, the social dimension, the
representation of the interests of postgraduate students, and the
differences and similarities in the structure and principles of
operation.

## Taras Shevchenko National University Student Representation

This year, VU SR expanded its international cooperation with the Student
Parliament of the Faculty of Psychology at Taras Shevchenko National
University of Kyiv. The cooperation started with an initial meeting
during which current work was shared, and points of contact were
discovered between VU SR and the representative office of one of the
oldest Ukrainian universities. Taras Shevchenko students shared their
experience with civil resistance from the students\' perspective during
the retreat, talking about the first days of the war in Ukraine and the
general adaptation of the study process to the current geopolitical
situation.

## ARQUS student Council

On 1-4 July, VU SR student representatives in the ARQUS Student Council
participated in the annual ARQUS Conference at the University of Minho.
During the conference, various working groups met and discussed
important topics in European higher education. During the conference,
the VU SR representative shared ARQUS StC\'s position on the European
degree.

On 2-4 April, VU SR student representatives in the ARQUS Student Council
participated in the annual ARQUS Conference at the University of
Leipzig, where the overall activities of the Alliance were evaluated
from the perspective of the ARQUS StC.
